##### [next >](https://github.com/programmers/system_qa/blob/main/docs/Dev%20Guide/2.%20Install%20%26%20Run.md)

# Ansible Usage

Ansible typical acts as the mission critical tool for server provisioning, configuration management, and deployments. However, Programmer's System uses a small a portion of its features to target local development machines for provisioning. This means there is a reasonably low learning curve.

## Ansible Details

- **Playbooks**: Known as "ecosystems" to the users (CLI/README/etc), these files encompass the instructions for installing and configuring software. For instance, a Java playbook would include items such as "Java 17", "Eclipse", "Maven", "Gradle", etc.

- **Tasks**: A list of small units inside of a playbook that run our software installation specifications.
 
- **Modules**: These are referenced in each task. For example, in the `Database Clients.yml` playbook, we see that "mycli" uses the `pip` module, "Redis Commander" uses the `npm` module, and "sqlitebrowser" uses the `apt` module for. There are many built in modules such as `apt`, `brew`, `yum`, `snap`, `npm`, `gem`, etc. Repository and key modules as well a custom script module are also present.

- **Tags**: As seen in the demo video on the README, user selections in the CLI are passed in to Ansible to determine if a task is to be ran or not. If the user selects "Angular" and "Vue", but not "React", for `Web Tools.yml`, tasks with the tag  "react" will be skipped. This is especially important in `Database Clients.yml` as there are many database engines to choose from.

- **Idempotency**: Ansible "knows" if a program is installed. The modules checks paths and the bin directories when the tasks run. The custom modules handle checks internally or require a "path" parameter to check for existence directly.

- **Format**: The playbooks use YAML with Jinja 2 to easily represent all aspects of the solution.

- **Galaxy/Roles**: Given _how_ Ansible is used in this project, Ansible Roles (+roles/collections) will certainly overcomplicate the developer experience. While Galaxy has much to offer, using straightforward playbooks with the large amount of built in modules (and few custom modules) will suffice.


## List of Current Playbooks:

_(these live at /src/ansible/playbooks/ubuntu)_

- Python.yml
- JavaScript and Node.yml
- Web Tools.yml
- Version Control.yml
- Database Clients.yml
- Containers and VMs.yml
- Scientific.yml
- Cloud Tools.yml
- Java.yml
- C and Cpp.yml
- Go.yml
- PHP.yml
- Rust.yml
- Ruby.yml

...Please review the [Master Software Document](https://github.com/programmers/system_qa/blob/main/docs/Software/Software%20Docs.md) for helpful descriptions, links, guides, and licenses.

## Abridged Playbook Walkthrough

To get a sense of how to work with playbooks, here's a slimmed down version of "Database Clients.yml" with comments:

```yaml
---
  # The top level playbook data
- name: Database Clients
  hosts: localhost

  # Deals with privileges, more on this later
  become: true

  # Tasks are small units that define how their modules will run
  tasks:
      # DBeaver isn't included in Ubuntu sources so this will add the official repository
    - name: DBeaver Repository
      apt_repository: repo=ppa:serge-rider/dbeaver-ce
      tags:
        - default # will always run

      # Now that we have the repository, install DBeaver
    - name: DBeaver Community
      apt: name=dbeaver-ce
      tags:
        - default

      # Scripts will discussed later. This custom module runs and ensures that if the playbook
      # is ran again, the binary "/usr/bin/usql" will be found and skip execution
    - name: Usql
      runscript:
        script: usql.sh
        creates: /usr/bin/usql
      tags:
        - default
      
      # Sometimes using snap modules are is preferred when there are no good PPAs/installers
    - name: Datagrip Trial
      snap: name=datagrip classic=yes
      tags:
        - datagrip_trial # will run only if the user opted for it

      # Task that uses the pip module to install the handy mycli tool.
    - name: mycli
      pip: name=mycli
      tags:
        - mysql
    
      # Example of using the npm module (for global installs).
    - name: Redis Commander
      npm: name=redis-commander global=yes
      tags:
        - redis

      # Modules tend to be versatile. For instance, apt understands how to handle remote deb files
    - name: MongoDB Compass
      apt: deb=https://downloads.mongodb.com/compass/mongodb-compass_1.30.1_amd64.deb
      tags:
        - mongodb
```

## Scripts Overview

As seen previously with the "Usql" example in `Database Clients.yml`, it is best to use bash scripts to install programs in certain cases. In our case, the custom the `runscript` module is the most robust way to accomplish this. Here's a similar use case:

**Docker Compose Example**:

```yaml
- name: Docker Compose
    runscript:
      script: docker_compose.sh
      creates: /usr/local/bin/docker-compose
    tags:
    - docker
```

The first step is to simply "tell" this module where the bash script lives (`script`) and then call out where it will install to (`creates`). If the playbook is ran a second time, the task will be skipped if it installed correctly.

For Ubuntu, all scripts live in `src/ansible/playbooks/ubuntu`.

**Let's take a look at the actual script**:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

curl -sL "https://github.com/docker/compose/releases/download/1.29.2/docker-compose-$(uname -s)-$(uname -m)" -o /usr/local/bin/docker-compose

chmod +x /usr/local/bin/docker-compose
```

This simple script pulls down the binary and places it the familiar `/usr/local/bin` location with the correct flag.

**How to Handle Non-Root User Scripts**:

If the "home user" must be ran in order to install a program, this module knows to do so with a "dot" shorthand approach:

```yaml
- name: Nvm
  runscript:
    script: nvm.sh
    creates: .nvm
  tags:
    - default
```

**Let's take a look at the actual script**:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

curl -sL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nvm-sh/nvm/v0.39.0/install.sh | bash
```

...by declaring (dot)nvm in `creates`, this tells the module to install the contents in `/home/youruser/.nvm` as "youruser".


**Shared Scripts Note**:

There are cases where scripts will work on Ubuntu, other Linux distros, and MacOS. In these cases, place your script in here: `src/ansible/playbooks/scripts/shared/` and call out the fact that a script is shared like so:

```yaml
- name: Some (*Nix) Shared Python Program
  runscript:
    script: something.sh
    creates: /usr/bin/something
    shared: true # <--- use this!!!
  tags:
    - default
```
