##### [< previous](https://github.com/programmers/system_qa/blob/master/docs/Dev%20Guide/1.%20Ansible%20Usage.md) | [next >](https://github.com/programmers/system_qa/blob/master/docs/Dev%20Guide/3.%20Contributing.md)

# Install & Run

Now that we have a good grasp on Ansible and how it's used in this solution, we must understand these remaining items:

1. Dependencies for Install
2. The CLI
3. File Generation
4. Running
5. Call Order

## Dependencies for Install 

the `run` bash script, the entry point of the solution, is to be called with the operating system one is targeting. For example, `sudo ./run ubuntu` will (quietly) kick off Ubuntu's install of OS-specific low-level packages dependencies and will continue the program from here.

Each OS has a script in `src/install/base/`. In the case of Ubuntu, `run` will:

1. Look for lock file to see if we've already installed Ubuntu's base dependencies
2. Perform apt updates
3. Install essential packages
4. Grab the latest Python (deadsnakes). Note: this is a Python codebase.
5. Installs Python inquirer (the package behind the CLI)
6. Installs the latest Ansible from its official ppa
7. Stores metadata in `/etc/ansible/` for later reference
8. Registers the custom Ansible modules
9. Creates a lock file if all operations succeeded

## The CLI

While the `run` script is essential for operations, it is largely `src/main.py` that handles all of the logic to move things forward. Note that `src/main.py` is called in `run` after the OS base dependencies are installed.

Using the previously mentioned inquirer package, we start off by calling `src/cli/prompt.py` that shows usage instructions and asks the user which "ecosystems" (playbooks) they need. From there, questions are filtered to include only the selected playbooks which user inputted values in mind.

After the prompts are completed and the data has been gathered, the logic references the `dict` data structure found in `src/cli/questions.py`. At this point, we know what playbooks are needed but also the specific answers that will align with the playbook tags. This dict allows us devs to be very specific about what a user wants, given a chosen "ecosystem" (playbook).

Consider the following part of the `src/cli/questions.py` data structure. We see that the user has selected `Web Tools.yml`. Imagine that the user selected "Angular" and "webstorm_web_trial" when prompted, those will correlate to the tags to enable a customized experience.

```python
"Web Tools": [
    {
        "key": "web_frameworks",
        "type": "checkboxes",
        "question": "Select the frontend CLIs you use",
        "tags": [
            ( "Angular", "angular" ), # HERE - will be an Ansible tag!
            ( "React", "react" ),
            ( "Vue", "vue" )
        ]
    },
    {
        "key": "webstorm_web_trial",
        "type": "list",
        "question": "Do you wish to install JetBrains WebStorm (Web) IDE trial?",
        "tags": [
            ( "Yes", "webstorm_web_trial" ), # HERE - will be an Ansible tag!
            ( "No",  "no_webstorm_web_trial" )
        ]
    },
],
```

## File Generation

`src/main.py` helps build up the final Ansible call by using the classes in `src/install/file_writers`. This section will be cut short as the next will have a deeper dive. The file_writers are responsible for:

1. Writing the selected playbooks that Ansible should run in `src/ansible/playbooks/ubuntu/run_playbooks.yml`. The contents can look like this:

```yaml
---
- import_playbook: 'Python.yml'
- import_playbook: 'JavaScript and Node.yml'
```

2. Generating the `src/install/run_ansible.sh` file with the proper entry.yml, args, and tags we normalized from the CLI output. This will be discussed in detail below. This is the critical bash script that actually runs Ansible.

## Running

As previously mentioned, `src/main.py` is responsible for making the call to write the `src/install/run_ansible.sh` script file. This is that generated file:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

sudo ansible-playbook src/ansible/playbooks/ubuntu/run_playbooks.yml --tags="angular,react,pycharm,mysql"
```

_Note: The generated `run_playbooks.yml` is its own file but the tags are passed in via `--tags_`. This was just a design decision by the Ansible folks._

## Call Order

Now that we've reviewed all of the prior operations, let's put it all together by stepping through `run`:

```bash
# Conditionally statisfies all "base" dependencies for a specific os
bash "src/install/base/"$os"_base.sh"

# Performs all CLI, logic, and file generation so Ansible can run
python src/main.py $os

# Generated file so ansible can run the needed playbooks and tags
bash src/install/run_ansible.sh 

# Finally, we share the important "Post Install" guide link for recommended manual steps
# https://github.com/programmers/system_qa/blob/master/docs/Post%20Install/Overview.md
```
